For car buyers, a new reality is setting in: You don’t necessarily have to pay more to go electric. The automobile industry may never be the same. There are some qualifiers, but the bottom line is a potentially momentous change. With recent price declines,  the cost to to buy and operate some electric vehicles over several years is now roughly on par with their gasoline-powered counterparts. The considerable government subsidies available to EV buyers—including a federal credit of up to $7,500 for qualified buyers and vehicles—play a part in this. But in some cases, EVs and their conventional equivalents are at cost parity even without those. It’s true that many electric vehicles still have a higher list price than their gas equivalents. But that gap is closing. We are now at the point that the considerable savings on fuel and maintenance costs that an EV offers can make up that difference, for some vehicles, over the first 2 to 5 years of their lives. Those savings also translate to an equal or lower monthly cost to own many EVs, when you add up the loan payment and fuel costs. One remarkable detail about this development: It wasn’t Tesla that got us here, though the company has played a big part, by spurring the rest of the industry to roll out new models. Nearly all of the vehicles at cost parity with their gas equivalents are non-Teslas. At the company’s investor day Wednesday, Chief Executive Elon Musk said Tesla is working on slashing the cost of production, but he stopped short of announcing the next-generation affordable EV that many had hoped for. There are other reasons EVs are becoming more attractive, including improvements in charging technology and the availability of public chargers. But the main reason for the disappearing cost gap is the declining price of battery packs—the single most expensive component in EVs, and the primary reason they typically cost more than conventional vehicles. We can thank two things for the falling cost of those batteries. One is economies of scale. Domestic and international producers have gotten substantially better at churning out batteries, for what market research firm Adamas Intelligence projects will be nearly 20 million vehicles in 2023. The other factor, just as important, is the gradual—and often overlooked—accretion of countless technological improvements to the battery-manufacturing process over the past decade. “Battery costs are the biggest contributor to the overall change in the cost of EVs, and their premium compared to [internal combustion engine] vehicles,” says Paul Augustine, director of sustainability at ride-sharing company Lyft. “We’ve seen that cost drop 90% from 2010 to 2020.” From the earliest days of electric vehicles, skeptics and proponents have argued that until electric vehicles cost the same as gas-powered ones, most people are unlikely to switch. Mr. Musk repeated the sentiment Wednesday, saying: “The desire for people to own a Tesla is extremely high—the limiting factor is their ability to pay for a Tesla.” Given the significance of batteries, this has led to an almost single-minded focus on bringing down their cost. It’s not just that scientists and engineers have figured out how to make batteries less expensively. They also are learning to make new kinds of batteries that use fewer expensive components. Some, like new iron-based batteries, known as LFP, that are used in some models by Tesla—and, in the future, by Volkswagen and Ford—don’t use metals such as nickel and cobalt that are increasingly supply-constrained and expensive. As the global share of these nickel- and cobalt-free batteries has grown, they have helped to keep the prices of those elements from spiraling out of control, says Ryan Castilloux, managing director at Adamas Intelligence. Iron-based batteries now represent nearly a third of all batteries in electric vehicles, worldwide, and that share may continue to grow, he adds. Comparing apples to apples in EVs and conventional autos. Robbie Orvis is senior director for modeling and analysis at Energy Innovation, an energy- and climate-policy think tank. He recently published a paper that found that many new EVs are cheaper to own and operate than their gasoline equivalents, on a monthly basis. Take, for example, the Mustang Mach-E, Ford’s popular electric crossover SUV. This varies by location, but the base model would cost around $46,000 total, if the buyer bought it with cash in New Jersey, according to Edmunds. Assuming a one-time $2,000 tax credit—the amount varies, but that is at the low end of what a consumer can expect—the total cost to own such a vehicle over 5 years, including depreciation, insurance, fuel and maintenance costs, is coincidentally also about $46,000. The full federal tax credit, and state credits, could bring that amount even lower for those eligible. Compare that to a comparable gas-powered Toyota RAV4. If a buyer pays cash and purchases it in the same location, that RAV4 costs around $34,000, according to Edmunds. But, thanks mainly to gasoline costs, the RAV4’s total cost of ownership over 5 years is about $45,000. In other words, in this case opting for the Mach-E over the RAV4 costs the user only about $200 more a year, assuming gasoline prices stay around current levels. (If gas prices spike again, the electric vehicle could save its driver a considerable amount.