Russia announced on Friday that it would cut its oil production next month by 500,000 barrels a day, or about 5 percent of its output — Moscow’s first substantive response to a wave of recently imposed sanctions on the country’s oil trade. Oil prices jumped on the news, and by late afternoon in Europe the price of Brent crude, the international benchmark, was 2.5 percent higher on the day, around $86.30 a barrel. West Texas Intermediate rose similarly, briefly rising above $80 a barrel. A rise in price may be exactly what Russia is seeking. The world’s third-largest producer of oil, Russia has been forced to sell its crude at a significant discount, estimated to be as much as 50 percent, to attract new buyers in Asia to make up for embargoes imposed in the European Union and elsewhere. The cutback in production was announced by Alexander Novak, a deputy prime minister and Russia’s point man on energy. His statement to reporters was combative, repeating a refrain from Russian leaders that “we will not sell oil to those who directly or indirectly adhere to the principles of the price cap,” according to the Russian news agency Interfax. But analysts said it appeared that Russia, which has done surprisingly well at maintaining production in recent months, was worried about the loss of oil revenue from restrictions placed on Russia’s oil trade by Western sanctions, including a price cap of $60 per barrel imposed in December. “Russia might be feeling that more and more countries are going to start attempting to use the price cap scheme,” said Felix Todd, an analyst at Argus Media, a pricing data firm. Moscow also may be trying to make the most of a bad situation, analysts say. “If Russia is going to have to lessen production — even for a period — it would rather try and give the impression that it is choosing to do so or is in control rather than that this is being forced on it by Western governments’ policies,” said Richard Bronze, head of geopolitics at Energy Aspects, a research firm. Mr. Novak said the production cut would “contribute to the restoration of market relations.” He also appeared to counter the idea that Russia was having trouble finding buyers for its crude. “Today, we are fully selling the entire volume of oil being produced,” he said, according to Interfax. For the past five years, Russia, along with Saudi Arabia, has been a co-leader of OPEC Plus, the oil producers’ group that has banded together to try to manage the oil market. If Russia does cut production, it could wind up falling by about a million barrels a day short of its OPEC Plus ceiling. In terms of the overall global market, a reduction of 500,000 barrels a day would represent about 0.5 percent of oil output. OPEC Plus said last week that it planned to stick with cuts of about two million barrels a day for the rest of the year. Analysts say Russia’s announced cuts appear unlikely to change that stance. In recent weeks, an abundance of Russian crude has been available, giving buyers leverage to extract discounts of as much as $40 a barrel on Russia’s most important crude grade, Urals, according to Argus Media. By cutting back production, Russia may simply be trying to raise the price it receives. If less Russian crude is available, buyers may be forced to settle for a smaller discount. “The glut is so big, they have to slash prices to find firm demand,” said Craig Kennedy, an associate at the Davis Center for Russian and Eurasian Studies at Harvard. Mr. Todd of Argus said the discount had already narrowed by around $1 after Mr. Novak’s comments. After the invasion of Ukraine, Russia’s oil output has held up better than many analysts expected. Russian companies found markets in India, Turkey and elsewhere to compensate for the loss of their key customers in Europe. But Russia has begun to collect less money from its oil sales. Late last year, the Kremlin conceded that oil revenues, a critical part of the country’s budget, would become “less predictable.” In December, the European Union imposed an embargo on most Russian crude on the same day the Group of 7 nations imposed its price cap on Russian oil sold to other countries. And this week, a price cap and a European embargo went into effect on refined oil products from Russia, like diesel and gasoline. With the latest embargo, Russia may finally have run out of new markets for its oil, analysts say. “They have been relatively successful this past year in redirecting crude” oil away from Europe, said Matthew J. Sagers, a vice president at S&P Global. “It was going to be far more difficult to do this with all the refined products they export,” he added. On Friday the Russian central bank issued a statement noting the sanctions and how they had added uncertainty to its economic forecasts. “After the enactment of the price caps, export prices for Russian oil significantly vary depending on its grades and shipping points,” it said. About the production cut announced by Mr. Novak, the bank said it “will monitor how this decision will be influencing oil price trends.” Any reduction of oil supplies risks lifting prices in a global market that is concerned about the potential for rapidly increasing demand from China, the world’s largest oil importer, now that Beijing has lifted Covid-19 restrictions.